rotatord.py


Chuck Liebling, W3PZ
charles.liebling@gmail.com

This is a small implementation of an azimuth/elevation antenna rotator.
It responds to serial commands formatted according to the rot2prog
protocol.

Why rot2prog?
It is well documented, and most importantly support for it is complete
in satellite tracking utilities like XPREDICT.

Hardware requirements:
Any Raspberry Pi should do.
I used a Pi Zero.
Why Pi? I know it's complete overkill. I could do this on a PIC16.
A Pi Zero is a turn-key control solution that's $5. The hardware works
and is completely done. It lets me write Python instead of poking registers
in C and worrying about boilerplate code for the peripherals and all the yak
shaving that would be necessary to stand up the dev environment.

I/O Assignments:
They are in the code. Look for the related comments.

Runing this program:
Make sure it has executable permissions
./rotatord.py -s <steps per degree> -p <path to serial device> -b <baud rate>
Of course, make sure the user has permission to access the serial port.
TODO:
Have the rotator thread exit gracefully
Move to Python 3
General clean-up

Notes on operation:
The rotator starts with the expectation that it is pointed NORTH at ZERO DEGREES elevation.
Orient your antenna this way.

Caveats:
This is a completely OPEN LOOP control.
There are NO LIMIT switches right now.
What this means is if you command rotations that can possibly damage mechanisms,
they'll happily run and destroy themselves.

Why isn't this implemented yet? Time, for starters. This was a quick hackjob so I could
use my IC9700 tri-band multimode radio to work low earth orbit satellites.

It worked fabulously for that purpose.

Hardware:
I used an Arrow Anetnnas handheld cross-polzrized antenna.
This antenna is designed to have a hand grip on it; you use a handheld transceiver
and simply track the satellite manually. This makes it useful for "repeater" style
FM satellites, but not so much transverter satellites which require larger radio gear.
The very light antenna made it possible to make a very portable, light duty rotator.
I simply mounted the handheld antenna to the rotator, and the gearboxes and motors 
had zbsolutely no problem handling the antenna's moment of inertia.

I made a two axis rotator out of:
2x NEMA 17 stepper motors with 27:1 gear reduction
2x NEMA 17 style stepper motor brackets
2" aluminum angle stock
Misc. hardware
You'll probably design something better, so I won't go into detail.

Ways you can improve things:
Add limit switches and an E-stop
Use a MEMS inclinometer and a compass module to have the system auto-zero.
Make a robust rotator, i.e. don't rely on the motors and gearboxes to bear the load.
Think a slew drive for the azimuth and another for elevation.
This would allow for using a larger antenna, and if they're weatherproof, permanent
installation as well.
